Add developer documentation (#678)
graalvm/native-build-tools: DEVELOPING.md

# Documentation for Developers

This document describes how to set up and develop Native Build Tools on your local machine.

## Environment

The project uses Gradle as its build system. At the very minimum, you should set `JAVA_HOME` to a [Gradle-compatible JDK](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/compatibility.html).

Some build tasks require a GraalVM JDK (e.g., tests). You should set `GRAALVM_HOME` to an appropriate GraalVM JDK.

## IDE Setup

The Native Build Tools repo is set up as a multi-project Gradle project, with the Maven and Gradle plugins declared as subprojects of the root project.
To set the project up in your IDE (e.g., IntelliJ IDEA), import the root project and the IDE should automatically import the subprojects.

## Building and Testing

You can use the various commands in the [Gradle build lifecycle](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/build_lifecycle.html) to build and test the project.
Some examples (all executed from the root of the repository):

```bash
# Build all projects
./gradlew assemble

# Build only the native-gradle-plugin (for example)
./gradlew :native-gradle-plugin:assemble

# Build and run all tests

> ./gradlew build

Reviewer: See you in 10 days :)

Author: what's in 10 days? 😱

Author: 😆 good call, we should be conscientious of the planet (and our users' time)

> # Build all projects
> ./gradlew assemble
> 
> # Build only the native-gradle-plugin (for example)
> ./gradlew :native-gradle-plugin:assemble
> 
> # Build and run all tests
> ./gradlew build

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Compile all projects
./gradlew assemble

# Run unit tests in all projects
./gradlew test

# Run functional tests in all projects
./gradlew funTest

# Compile only the native-gradle-plugin (for example)
./gradlew :native-gradle-plugin:assemble

# Build and run all tests, complete (and very long) build
./gradlew build
```

```

## Debugging Plugin(s)
It is often useful to attach a debugger to the Gradle and Maven plugins during a project build.

For the Gradle plugin, this can be accomplished by passing debugger options to the Gradle daemon via `org.gradle.jvmargs`, for example:

```bash
JAVA_OPTS="-Dorg.gradle.jvmargs=-agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,suspend=y,address=8000" ./gradlew assemble
```

The Gradle daemon will suspend on start-up, wait for you to attach a debugger, and then remain attached for subsequent Gradle commands.

For the Maven plugin, simply use the `mvnDebug` command in place of the `mvn` command.

## Testing Local Changes with an Existing Project
A common development task is to modify a plugin and then test it with an existing project.

To do this, first modify the project as necessary, and then build and publish the plugins:
```bash
./gradlew publishAllPublicationsToCommonRepository --no-parallel
```
The above command publishes to a "common" repository located at `build/common-repo`.

Next, update the project build files:

> 1. Update the version string. The version can be found manually by searching for the published artifacts in `~/.m2/repository/org/graalvm/buildtools/native/`, or alternatively by checking the `nativeBuildTools` property [here](gradle/libs.versions.toml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update the version string. The version can be found manually by searching for the published artifacts in `build/common-repo`, or alternatively by checking the `nativeBuildTools` property [here](gradle/libs.versions.toml).
```

Author: ah, good catch

# Documentation for Developers

This document describes how to set up and develop Native Build Tools on your local machine.

## Environment

> The project uses Gradle as its build system. At the very minimum, you should set `JAVA_HOME` to a [Gradle-compatible JDK](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/compatibility.html).

Reviewer 2: Maybe 
```suggestion
Start by setting `JAVA_HOME` to a [Gradle-compatible JDK (https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/compatibility.html).
```

Some build tasks require a GraalVM JDK (e.g., tests). You should set `GRAALVM_HOME` to an appropriate GraalVM JDK.

## IDE Setup

> The Native Build Tools repo is set up as a multi-project Gradle project, with the Maven and Gradle plugins declared as subprojects of the root project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Native Build Tools repository is structured as a Gradle multi-project, with the Maven and Gradle plugins declared as subprojects of the root project. 
```

> To set the project up in your IDE (e.g., IntelliJ IDEA), import the root project and the IDE should automatically import the subprojects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure it in your IDE (e.g., IntelliJ IDEA), import the root project, and the IDE should automatically detect and include the subprojects."
```

Reviewer 2: I just tried to avoid the repetitive use of "set up".

## Building and Testing

You can use the various commands in the [Gradle build lifecycle](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/build_lifecycle.html) to build and test the project.

> Some examples (all executed from the root of the repository):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some examples are (all executed from the root of the repository):

```bash
# Compile all projects
./gradlew assemble

# Run unit tests in all projects
./gradlew test

# Run functional tests in all projects
./gradlew funTest

# Compile only the native-gradle-plugin (for example)
./gradlew :native-gradle-plugin:assemble

# Build and run all tests, complete (and very long) build
./gradlew build
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Two lines empty space

## Debugging Plugin(s)

> It is often useful to attach a debugger to the Gradle and Maven plugins during a project build.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

It is often useful to attach a debugger to the Gradle and Maven plugins during a project build.
```

Reviewer 2: One empty line before the title is a nice practice :)

For the Gradle plugin, this can be accomplished by passing debugger options to the Gradle daemon via `org.gradle.jvmargs`, for example:

```bash
JAVA_OPTS="-Dorg.gradle.jvmargs=-agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,suspend=y,address=8000" ./gradlew assemble
```

The Gradle daemon will suspend on start-up, wait for you to attach a debugger, and then remain attached for subsequent Gradle commands.

For the Maven plugin, simply use the `mvnDebug` command in place of the `mvn` command.

## Testing Local Changes with an Existing Project

> A common development task is to modify a plugin and then test it with an existing project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

A common development task is to modify a plugin and then test it with an existing project.
```

To do this, first modify the project as necessary, and then build and publish the plugins:
```bash
./gradlew publishAllPublicationsToCommonRepository --no-parallel
```
The above command publishes to a "common" repository located at `build/common-repo`.

Next, update the project build files:
1. Update the version string. The version can be found manually by searching for the published artifacts in `build/common-repo`, or alternatively by checking the `nativeBuildTools` property [here](gradle/libs.versions.toml).
2. Update the list of repositories to include and prioritize the common repo.

> ### Gradle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Make the following changes to the build files:
```

Make the following changes to the build files:
```bash
# build.gradle
 plugins {
     ...
-    id 'org.graalvm.buildtools.native' version '0.9.25'
+    id 'org.graalvm.buildtools.native' version '0.10.5-SNAPSHOT'
 }

 repositories {
+    maven {
+        name = "common"
+        url = "$NATIVE_BUILD_TOOLS_ROOT/build/common-repo"
+    }
     ...
 }

# settings.gradle
 pluginManagement {
     repositories {
+        maven {
+            name = "common"
+            url = "$NATIVE_BUILD_TOOLS_ROOT/build/common-repo"
+        }
         # NB: If repositories were not specified before, declaring the common
         # repo will overwrite the default repository; you may also need to
         # declare that repository explicitly.
         mavenCentral()
         ...
     }
 }
```
Then, run the Gradle command as usual.

### Maven

> Make the following changes to pom.xml:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Make the following changes to _pom.xml_:
```

# Documentation for Developers

> This document describes how to set up and develop native-build-tools on your local machine.

Reviewer 2: native-build-tools  -> Native Build Tools

## Environment

The project uses Gradle as its build system. At the very minimum, you should set `JAVA_HOME` to a [Gradle-compatible JDK](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/compatibility.html).

Some build tasks require a GraalVM JDK (e.g., tests). You should set `GRAALVM_HOME` to an appropriate GraalVM JDK.

> ## IDE setup

Reviewer 2: ```markdown
## IDE Setup
```

> The native-build-tools repo is set up as a multi-project Gradle project, with the Maven and Gradle plugins declared as subprojects of the root project.

Reviewer 2: The native-build-tools repo ...  -> The Native Build Tools repo

To set the project up in your IDE (e.g., IntelliJ IDEA), import the root project and the IDE should automatically import the subprojects.

> ## Building & testing

Reviewer 2: ```markdown
Building and Testing
```

You can use the various commands in the [Gradle build lifecycle](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/build_lifecycle.html) to build and test the project.
Some examples (all executed from the root of the repository):

```bash
# Build all projects
./gradlew assemble

# Build only the native-gradle-plugin (for example)
./gradlew :native-gradle-plugin:assemble

# Build and run all tests
./gradlew build
```

> ## Debugging plugin(s)

Reviewer 2: ```markdown
Debugging Plugin(s)
```

```bash
JAVA_OPTS="-Dorg.gradle.jvmargs=-agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,suspend=y,address=8000" ./gradlew assemble
```

The Gradle daemon will suspend on start-up, wait for you to attach a debugger, and then remain attached for subsequent Gradle commands.

For the Maven plugin, simply use the `mvnDebug` command in place of the `mvn` command.

## Testing local changes with an existing project
A common development task is to modify a plugin and then test it with an existing project.

To do this, first modify the project as necessary, and then build and publish the plugins to the local Maven repository:
```bash
./gradlew publishToMavenLocal --no-parallel
```

Next, update the plugin version string in the project build files.
The version can be found manually by searching for the published artifacts in `~/.m2/repository/org/graalvm/buildtools/native/`, or alternatively by checking the `nativeBuildTools` property [here](gradle/libs.versions.toml).

For Gradle, the change looks like the following.
You may also need to direct Gradle to use the local Maven repository to resolve the plugin:
```bash
# build.gradle
 plugins {
     ...

> -    id 'org.graalvm.buildtools.native' version '0.9.25'

Author: I wrote this as a "diff" code sample to show how the existing build.gradle file might change (in this case, replacing a real release with a snapshot release)

+    id 'org.graalvm.buildtools.native' version '0.10.5-SNAPSHOT'
 }

  repositories {
+    mavenLocal()
     ...
 }

# settings.gradle
pluginManagement {
  repositories {
+     mavenLocal()
      ...
  }
}
```

For Maven, simply bump the version and it should try the local repository automatically:
```bash
# pom.xml

> -        <native.maven.plugin.version>0.9.25</native.maven.plugin.version>

Reviewer 3: Same as above, why do we need this and `SNAPSHOT`?
